# Module 2.3

## While Loops
* The while loop performs the code written within the look all while the given condition is true. In other words, the while loop runs continuously until it finds that the condition is flase and then it exits.
* While loops differ from for loops in they they do not require an incrementor. Because there is no incrementor (although one could be added if desired) while loops will run an unknown number of times; however many times are needed to trigger the condition to be false.
* The structure and syntax of a while loop is very simple: `while(condition){ execution code }` 
```
while (condition to be met goes here){

  code to be executed goes here

}
```
## While loop use cases
* Lets say that we want to divide the number 256 by 2 as many times as possible using a while loop. Each run of the loop will take the number 256, divide it by 2, save this new number into a variable, check the condition again for true/false, and if true then it will repeat the process using the new number in the variable. When the number has been divided so many times by two that it is no longer divisible, then the condition will return false and the loop will exit. 
```
//divide the number by 2
int number = 256;  //declare our starting value outside/before the loop

  while ( number >= 2 ){  // This is our condition. As long as this is still true, execute the code inside

    number = number / 2;    // this is what we are executing, her we are dividing the number by 2 and reassigning the value to the number variable
                        // after this line, the value of number is half of what it was moments before.

     // here at the bottom of the execution section, the loop does not just exit, rather it checks the initial condition.
     // if the condition is true then it repeats the process. If it is false, then it really does just exit the loop

  }
```
* something important to note about the code above. We didn't know how many times the loop was going to run. If we did know then we could have just used a for loop which has an iterator that tells it exactly how many times to run the loop. 
* Our for loop ran 8 times because the starting number 256 was divisible by 2 8 times. If we use a different starting number then number of runs of the loop will be different. This distinguishes a while loop from a for loop in that the number of runs is uncertain, while the for loops number of runs is explicitly declared.

## One infinite loop
* While loops are suceptible to getting stuck in an infinately executing loop. Remeber that the loop will run until the condition is false, well if the condition never becomes false then the loop will never end. Therefore, it is important to ensure that the condition will eventually trigger false. In other words, we need to give the while loop a way out. An infinite loop could crash the software. 
```
int number = 2048;

while (number>=2){
 
  // number = number / 2;  //I've commented this line out, thereby making the loop infinite. 
                           // Since number is not changing (remains at 2048), the condition (number>=2) remains true over and over and over again. 
                           // There is no way for the loop to exit, which is bad.

}

println("Hello");         // this line of code will never be reached

```
* Therefore be mindful of the condition that allows the loop to exit.
* The `break` keyword can be used to force the loop to exit at any given moment.
* In the following example, we are using a while loop to test if a random number is greater than 99. We will generate a random number between 0 and 100. If that number is 99 or higher, then the loop will exit, else it will generate a new random number between 0 and 100 and try again. It will keep trying by generating a new number and checking the condition until it succeeds.  The chance of a random number between 0 and 100 of being 99 or higher is rather slim, therefore lets expect this loop to run multiple times (who knows how many) before succeeding. 
```
float chosen_number = random(0,100);   //start with choosing a random number between 0 and 100
int loop_runs_count = 0;   //lets keep track of how many times the loop runs

while ( chosen_number <= 99 ){
 
  chosen_number = random(0,100);   // replace the old number with a newly generated random number
  
  loop_runs_count ++;  //keeping count of the number of runs

}

println("finished. Ran "+loop_runs_count+" times.");    //when the loop finally finishes, we'll print out the results to the console so that we can see them.
